Think you don't have sexual fantasies? Think again.
How to help someone become aware they have sexual fantasies, and why that matters.
Artemisia de Vine
May 05, 2025

“I don’t have sexual fantasies, “ said Ruth almost defiantly. I’m fully present in the moment with my partner.”

Sexual fantasies are really common, and most people do have them in some form or another. Yes, even people who think they don’t have them. Just as some people are more aware of their dreams than others, so too with sexual fantasies.

Often, when I encounter someone who says they don’t fantasise, asking them a few questions can prompt them to become aware of their fantasies.

“A moment ago, you told me that you noticed some well-chiselled young men on the beach this morning when you were walking your dog, and that one in particular set off a momentary spark of desire inside you.”


“Yes, it was just his lovely tanned skin and beautiful fit body. I mean the boy had abs!” replied Ruth with a slight blush. “He was a good 15 years younger than me and so full of energy! But really, he is just objectively attractive. My body was having a biological response.”

“Great! I am curious about why you were attracted to one more than the other, though. Didn’t you tell me they were both fit, tanned and virile?” I asked.

“Yes, that’s true. I guess they were both objectively attractive.”

“Yet only one of them set off the spark. Let's take a closer look at that micromoment when the spark ignited. What did you get to feel in response to the one guy?”

She thought for a moment and then said, “I felt quite tingly and alive. I felt envious of his physical strength now that middle age is slowing me down a bit. I remembered how free I used to be when I could run like that. I remembered how good sex was when I was fit and unfettered like them.”

Subscribe for free to receive insights into the erotic psyche!

“Nice one!” I encouraged, then dug deeper. “Did any other thoughts flash across your mind as you saw them pass by?”

“Yes, well, the spark of desire ignited when he looked over my way, and for the briefest moment, we made eye contact. He just looked so unashamed of himself. He was so confident that he did not need to be arrogant or shy. Just the perfect balance of self-assuredness. He saw me and acknowledged me with a slight nod, and his eyes were open and unguarded. He seemed really present and embodied.” She said a little dreamily.

“Yes, good. Think about it for a moment. What flashed up in your mind at that moment?”

“Well, now that you mention it, I imagined being safe to be sexually vulnerable with him. I imagined him coming over and talking to me. I imagined he would gracefully take the initiative to lead a friendly conversation.”

“And what about the other guy?”

Actually, come to think of it, I imagined he came over, too, but he remained a sort of faceless presence. I imagined enjoying feeling feminine and attractive again, the way I did when I was younger, when I was the flower and man-bees hovered in abundance.”

“Right. So your body felt a flash of desire in response to that moment. The moment that you saw the perfect symbols to create the exact conditions you needed to let your guards down and lose yourself in pleasure. Can you see how you had the very baby beginnings of a sexual response in reaction to the story your mind made up? How your mind used that split-second interaction as a canvas to project onto? You had an imagined sense of safety and warm intimacy while feeling young, full of energy and sexually enticing again, all with a pair of complete strangers you know nothing about?”

“Yes, I suppose I did!”

“That, my darling, is a sexual fantasy. Anytime your mind conjures a story or projects a meaning onto a moment - or even when you just remember a feeling that you associate with that body type, or that cheeky wink, that is your mind using fantasy to ignite your sexual spark.”

“Oh! That’s really helpful! Yes, I suppose I did project my own erotic narrative onto him as he passed by. I hadn’t thought of that as fantasy, but I guess it is!”

Notice how Ruth initially thought she was turned on by the reality of the moment, but how, in fact, she projected meaning-making fantasy onto the interaction. The body types alone weren’t enough because the other young man was beautiful too. Yet, the spark of desire didn’t really ignite until his companion made eye contact with very specific body language and attitude. This provided the perfect symbolic canvas for her erotic mind to project onto.

Sexual fantasies can be full-blown storylines giving all the lead up to the physical sexual play, as well as the sex acts themselves, and they can also simply be flashes of body types and sex acts in your mind’s eye. Sometimes fantasies aren’t visual at all. They're a remembered sensation or a longed-for emotional texture, like the ache of being wanted, or the thrill of being seen.

(More about different types of sexual fantasies and how to recognise the less obvious ones here.)

Why sexual fantasies unlock your real-life relationships
When you become aware of them, you can become aware of the exact conditions you need to ignite your spark, and that gives you the power to ask for what you need from your real-life lovers.

Instead of being passive and hoping all the stars magically align, or taking the momentary symbolism literally and dumping your middle-aged partner to date buff younger men, you can trace what those younger men symbolised for you and how they created the right conditions for your sexual desire to blossom.

The deVinery Method shows you how to create the same effect with your real-life current partner, who may or may not physically resemble the appearance of the people you fantasise about. Because the thing that really sparked your arousal was not skin deep. It was a psychological recipe you can repeat once you know what made it tasty. Knowledge is power! You can then move beyond hit-and-miss attempts to “spice things up” and begin creating date nights that deliberately activate each other’s sexual desire with rocket-fueled precision- and actually satiate it.

Subscribe for free to get your hands on my upcoming book The Spirituality of Smut: The surprising wisdom of sexual fantasies as soon as it’s released!

Artemisia de Vine: Desire Philosopher | Erotic Intelligence architect. Creator of The deVinery Method: a paradigm shift in how we understand and engage desire, the erotic mind and consciousness itself.
